A subtype of "ad hominem" when it turns into name-calling rather than arguing about the originally proposed argument.
Abusive fallacy
An exception to a generalization is ignored.
Accident
Attacking the arguer instead of the argument.
Ad hominem
When a categorical syllogism has a positive conclusion, but at least one negative premise.
Affirmative conclusion from a negative premise
Concluded that one logical disjunction must be false because the other disjunct is true; A or B; A; therefore not B.
Affirming a disjunct
The antecedent in an indicative conditional is claimed to be true because the consequent is true; if A, then B; B, therefore A.
Affirming the consequent
A common ambiguity in syllogisms in which the middle term is equivocated
Ambiguous middle term
Where an assertion is deemed true or false based on the accomplishments of the proposer.
Appeal to accomplishment
Where an assertion is deemed true because of the position or authority of the person asserting it.
Appeal to authority
The conclusion is supported by a premise that asserts positive or negative consequences from some course of action in an attempt to distract from the initial discussion
Appeal to consequences
Where an argument is made due to the manipulation of emotions, rather than the use of valid reasoning
Appeal to emotion
Where an assertion is deemed true or false based on an assumed pretense of equality.
Appeal to equality
A specific type of appeal to emotion where an argument is made by increasing fear and prejudice towards the opposing side
Appeal to fear
A specific type of appeal to emotion where an argument is made due to the use of flattery to gather support.
Appeal to flattery
An argument made through coercion or threats of force to support position
Appeal to force
The argument states that a certain position is false or wrong and/or should be disregarded because its proponent fails to act consistently in accordance with that position
Appeal to hypocrisy
Assuming that a claim is true (or false) because it has not been proven false (true) or cannot be proven false (true).
Appeal to ignorance
Where a premise is dismissed by calling into question the motives of its proposer
Appeal to motive
Where a proposal is claimed to be superior or better solely because it is new or modern.
Appeal to novelty
An argument attempts to induce pity to sway opponents
Appeal to pity
Supporting a conclusion because the arguer is poor (or refuting because the arguer is wealthy). (Opposite of appeal to wealth.)
Appeal to poverty
Assumes that because something could happen, it is inevitable that it will happen.
Appeal to probability
An argument is made by presenting the opponent's argument in a way that makes it appear ridiculous
Appeal to ridicule
A specific type of appeal to emotion where an argument is made through exploiting people's bitterness or spite towards an opposing party
Appeal to spite
Where a proposition is claimed to be true or good solely because many people believe it to be so
Appeal to the majority
A conclusion supported solely because it has long been held to be true.
Appeal to tradition
Supporting a conclusion because the arguer is wealthy (or refuting because the arguer is poor). (Sometimes taken together with the appeal to poverty as a general appeal to the arguer's financial situation.)
Appeal to wealth
Assumes that if an argument for some conclusion is fallacious, then the conclusion itself is false.
Argument from fallacy
Signifies that it has been discussed extensively until nobody cares to discuss it anymore
Argument from repetition
Where the conclusion is based on silence of opponent, failing to give proof, based on "lack of evidence", lack of contrary evidence
Argument from silence
Making a probability judgement based on conditional probabilities, without taking into account the effect of prior probabilities.
Base rate fallacy
Where the conclusion of an argument is implicitly or explicitly assumed in one of the premises
Begging the question
The argument that ignores low probability, high impact events, thus down playing the role of chance and under representing known risks
Black swan blindness
An argument which disregards lost opportunity costs (typically non-obvious, difficult to determine or otherwise hidden) associated with destroying property of others, or other ways of externalizing costs onto others. For example, an argument that states breaking a window generates income for a window fitter, but disregards the fact that the money spent on the new window cannot now be spent on new shoes.
Broken window fallacy
It is assumed that there is one, simple cause of an outcome when in reality it may have been caused by a number of only jointly sufficient causes.
Causal oversimplification
Act of pointing at individual cases or data that seem to confirm a particular position, while ignoring a significant portion of related cases or data that may contradict that position.
Cherry picking
Where a thesis is deemed incorrect because it was commonly held when something else, clearly false, was also commonly held[citation needed]
Chronological snobbery
Where the consequence of the phenomenon is claimed to be its root cause
Circular cause and consequence
Assumption that an outcome simultaneously satisfying multiple conditions is more probable than an outcome satisfying a single one of them.
Conjunction fallacy
Improperly rejecting a claim for being imprecise.
Continuum fallacy
A faulty assumption that correlation between two variables implies that one causes the other.
Correlation does not imply causation
Involves the confusion between two notions by defining one in terms of the other.
Definist fallacy
The consequent in an indicative conditional is claimed to be false because the antecedent is false; if A, then B; not A, therefore not B.
Denying the antecedent
Inferences about the nature of specific individuals are based solely upon aggregate statistics collected for the group to which those individuals belong.
Ecological fallacy
The misleading use of a term with more than one meaning (by glossing over which meaning is intended at a particular time)
Equivocation
Which reasons that the original or historical meaning of a word or phrase is necessarily similar to its actual present-day meaning.
Etymological fallacy
An argument has two universal premises and a particular conclusion.
Existential fallacy
Assuming that something true of part of a whole must also be true of the whole
Fallacy of composition
Assuming that something true of a thing must also be true of all or some of its parts
Fallacy of division
A categorical syllogism that is invalid because both of its premises are negative.
Fallacy of exclusive premises
A categorical syllogism that has four terms.
Fallacy of four terms
Assuming that the compromise between two positions is always correct
Fallacy of the mean
The middle term in a categorical syllogism is not distributed.
Fallacy of the undistributed middle
An argument by analogy in which the analogy is poorly suited.
False analogy
An advocate appeals to an irrelevant, unqualified, unidentified, biased or fabricated source in support of an argument
False attribution
Two alternative statements are held to be the only possible options, when in reality there are more.
False dichotomy
The incorrect belief that separate, independent events can affect the likelihood of another random event.
Gambler's fallacy
Where a conclusion is suggested based solely on something or someone's origin rather than its current meaning or context.
Genetic fallacy
Arguing that because two things share a property they are the same
Guilt by association
Basing a broad conclusion on a small sample.
Hasty generalization
Occurs when one assumes that decision makers of the past viewed events from the same perspective and having the same information as those subsequently analyzing the decision. (Not to be confused with presentism, which is a mode of historical analysis in which present-day ideas, such as moral standards, are projected into the past.)
Historian's fallacy
Where a "middle-man" is used for explanation, this usually leads to regressive middle-man.  Explanations without actually explaining the real nature of a function or a process. Instead, it explains the concept in terms of the concept itself, without first defining or explaining the original concept.
Homunculus fallacy
An argument that supports both sides of an issue by using terms that are selectively emotionally sensitive.
If-by-whiskey
A categorical syllogism that is invalid because its major term is not distributed in the major premise but distributed in the conclusion.
Illicit major
A categorical syllogism that is invalid because its minor term is not distributed in the minor premise but distributed in the conclusion.
Illicit minor
Where not enough information is provided to make a complete comparison
Incomplete comparison
Where different methods of comparison are used, leaving one with a false impression of the whole comparison
Inconsistent comparison
Addresses the assumption that the meaning intended by the author of a literary work is of primary importance
Intentional fallacy
An argument that may in itself be valid, but does not address the issue in question.
Irrelevant conclusion
Insulting or pejorative language to influence the recipient's judgment
Judgmental language
Using multiple inconsistent arguments to defend a position.
Kettle logic
Someone asks a question that presupposes something that has not been proven or accepted by all the people involved. This fallacy is often used rhetorically, so that the question limits direct replies to those that serve the questioner's agenda.
Loaded question
The belief that the outcomes of a non-regulated random occurrences can be encapsulated by a statistic; a failure to take into account unknown unknowns in determining the probability of an event's taking place.
Ludic fallacy
The substitution of identical designators in a true statement can lead to a false one.
Masked man fallacy
When one considers the way he sees the world as the way the world really is.
Mind projection fallacy
Involves describing an occurrence in vivid detail, even if it is an exceptional occurrence, to convince someone that it is a problem.
Misleading vividness
Argument in which evidence presented in response to a specific claim is dismissed and some other (often greater) evidence is demanded
Moving the goalposts
Claims about what ought to be on the basis of statements about what is.
Naturalistic fallacy
When a categorical syllogism has a negative conclusion but affirmative premises.
Negative conclusion from affirmative premises
When solutions to problems are rejected because they are not perfect.
Nirvana fallacy
When a generalization is made true only when a counterexample is ruled out on shaky grounds.
No true Scotsman
The burden of proof is on the person who makes the claim, not on the person who denies (or questions the claim). It is a particular case of the "argumentum ad ignorantiam" fallacy, here the burden is shifted on the person defending against the assertion
Onus probandi
An accurate generalization that comes with qualifications which eliminate so many cases that what remains is much less impressive than the initial statement might have led one to assume.
Overwhelming exception
When an inanimate object is declared to have characteristics of animate objects.
Pathetic fallacy
Comparing an opponent or their argument to Hitler or Nazism in an attempt to associate a position with one that is universally reviled (See also  Godwin's law)
Playing the Nazi card
A type of ad hominem where adverse information about a target is presented with the intention of discrediting everything that the target person says
Poisoning the well
Submission of others to an argument too complex and verbose to reasonably deal with in all its intimate details. (See also Gish Gallop and argument from authority.)
Proof by verbosity
A low probability of false matches does not mean a low probability of some false match being found
Prosecutor's fallacy
An observer presupposes the objectivity of his own perspective when analyzing a behavioral event
Psychologist's fallacy
Refers to the selective excerpting of words from their original context in a way that distorts the source's intended meaning.
Quoting out of context
A speaker attempts to distract an audience by deviating from the topic at hand by introducing a separate argument which the speaker believes will be easier to speak to.
Red herring
Ascribes cause where none exists. The flaw is failing to account for natural fluctuations. It is frequently a special kind of the post hoc fallacy.
Regression fallacy
A fallacy of ambiguity, when an abstraction (abstract belief or hypothetical construct) is treated as if it were a concrete, real event or physical entity. In other words, it is the error of treating as a "real thing" something which is not a real thing, but merely an idea.
Reification
The argument that because some event has occurred, its occurrence must have been inevitable beforehand
Retrospective determinism
I need not prove my claim, you must prove it is false
Shifting the burden of proof
Asserting that a relatively small first step inevitably leads to a chain of related events culminating in some significant impact
Slippery slope
Where a proponent of a position attempts to cite something as an exemption to a generally accepted rule or principle without justifying the exemption
Special pleading
An argument based on misrepresentation of opponent's position twisting his words, or by means of (false) assumptions
Straw man
Where a correlative is redefined so that one alternative is made impossible.
Suppressed correlative
Improperly asserting a cause to explain a cluster of data
Texas sharpshooter fallacy
A commonly used phrase, sometimes passing as folk wisdom, used to quell cognitive dissonance, conceal lack of thought-entertainment, move onto other topics etc.  but in any case, end the debate with a cliche—not a point.
Thought-terminating cliche
Occurs when it is assumed that if one wrong is committed, another wrong will cancel it out.
Two wrongs make a right
A specific type of appeal to emotion where a decision is made according to what might be pleasing to imagine, rather than according to evidence or reason.
Wishful thinking
Cause and effect are reversed. The cause is said to be the effect and vice versa.
Wrong direction
