After an investment of effort in producing change, remembering one's past performance as more difficult than it actually was.
Change bias
The retention of few memories from before the age of four.
Childhood amnesia
Incorrectly remembering one's past attitudes and behaviour as resembling present attitudes and behaviour.
Consistency bias
That cognition and memory are dependent on context, such that out-of-context memories are more difficult to retrieve than in-context memories (e.g., recall time and accuracy for a work-related memory will be lower at home, and vice versa).
Context effect
The tendency for people of one race to have difficulty identifying members of a race other than their own.
Cross-race effect
A bias in which the emotion associated with unpleasant memories fades more quickly than the emotion associated with positive events.
Fading affect bias
That self-generated information is remembered best. For instance, people are better able to recall memories of statements that they have generated than similar statements generated by others.
Self-generation effect
The tendency to forget information that can be easily found online.
Google effect
That humorous items are more easily remembered than non-humorous ones, which might be explained by the distinctiveness of humor, the increased cognitive processing time to understand the humor, or the emotional arousal caused by the humor.
Humor effect
That people are more likely to identify as true statements those they have previously heard (even if they cannot consciously remember having heard them), regardless of the actual validity of the statement. In other words, a person is more likely to believe a familiar statement than an unfamiliar one.
Illusion-of-truth effect
Memory distortions introduced by the loss of details in a recollection over time, often concurrent with sharpening or selective recollection of certain details that take on exaggerated significance in relation to the details or aspects of the experience lost through leveling. Both biases may be reinforced over time, and by repeated recollection or re-telling of a memory.
Leveling and Sharpening
That different methods of encoding information into memory have different levels of effectiveness.
Levels-of-processing effect
A smaller percentage of items are remembered in a longer list, but as the length of the list increases, the absolute number of items remembered increases as well.
List-length effect
That misinformation affects people's reports of their own memory.
Misinformation effect
When information is retained in memory but the source of the memory is forgotten. One of Schacter's Seven Sins of Memory, Misattribution was divided into Source Confusion, Cryptomnesia and False Recall/False Recognition.
Misattribution
That memory recall is higher for the last items of a list when the list items were received via speech than when they were received via writing.
Modality effect
The improved recall of information congruent with one's current mood.
Mood congruent memory bias
That a person in a group has diminished recall for the words of others who spoke immediately before or after this person.
Next-in-line effect
That being intoxicated with a mind-altering substance makes it harder to retrieve motor patterns from the Basal Ganglion.
Osborn effect
That being shown some items from a list makes it harder to retrieve the other items.
Part-list cueing effect
That people seem to perceive not the sum of an experience but the average of how it was at its peak (e.g. pleasant or unpleasant) and how it ended.
Peak-end effect
The unwanted recurrence of memories of a traumatic event.
Persistence
That concepts are much more likely to be remembered experientially if they are presented in picture form than if they are presented in word form.
Picture superiority effect
That older adults favor positive over negative information in their memories.
Positivity effect
That memories relating to the self are better recalled than similar information relating to others.
Self-relevance effect
Misattributing the source of a memory, e.g.  misremembering that one saw an event personally when actually it was seen on television.
Source Confusion
That information is better recalled if exposure to it is repeated over a longer span of time.
Spacing effect
Memory distorted towards stereotypes (e.g. racial or gender), e.g. "black-sounding" names being misremembered as names of criminals.
Stereotypical bias
The weakening of the recency effect in the case that an item is appended to the list that the subject is not required to recall.
Suffix effect
That frequent testing of material that has been committed to memory improves memory recall.
Testing effect
When a subject is able to recall parts of an item, or related information, but is frustratingly unable to recall the whole item. This is thought an instance of "blocking" where multiple similar memories are being recalled and interfere with each other.
Tip of the tongue phenomenon
That the "gist" of what someone has said is better remembered than the verbatim wording.
Verbatim effect
That uncompleted or interrupted tasks are remembered better than completed ones.
Zeigarnik effect
